=encoding utf8

=head1 NAME

Pegex::Regex - Use Pegex Like a Regex

=head1 SYNOPSIS

    {
        # Turn on Pegex regular expressions in lexical scope.
        use Pegex::Regex;
        my $grammar = qr{$grammar_text}x;
        $text =~ $grammar;
        my $result = \%/;

        # Turn off Pegex in this scope.
        no Pegex::Regex;
    }

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This is a trivial sugar module that lets you use Pegex parser grammars like
regular expressions, if you're into that kind of thing.

This is basically a clone of Damian Conway's L<Regexp::Grammars> module API.
You put a grammar into a C<qr{...}x> and apply it the input string you want to
parse. If the parse is successful, you get a data structure of the content in
C<%/>.

IMHO, building a recursive decscent parser entirely inside of a regular
expression, is not the clearest way to code. But, of course, TMTOWTDI. :)

=head1 NOTE

This module is just for experimental fun. See L<Pegex> for the right way to use
the Pegex parsing framework.

=head1 TMTOWTDI

Here's a Pegex::Regex code snippet:

    use Pegex::Regex;
    $text =~ qr{... Pegex grammar text ...};
    $data = \%/;

And the equivalent Pegex code:

    use Pegex;
    my $data = pegex('... Pegex grammar text ...')->parse($text);

=head1 WARNING

This gateway drug, er, module, technically should not even work.

It turns your "grammar inside a regexp" into a Pegex::Grammar using qr{}
overloading, and then turns your regexp itself into a shim that calls the
parse method for you. This is highly magical and technically makes a reentrant
call to the regex engine, which is not supported yet.  Use at your own risk.

Better yet, do yourself a favor and learn how to use the Pegex toolset without
this ::Regex sugar.  C<:-)>

=head1 SEE ALSO

=over

=item *

L<Pegex>

=item *

L<Regexp::Grammars>

=back

=head1 AUTHOR

Ingy döt Net <ingy@cpan.org>

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

Copyright (c) 2011, 2012, 2013. Ingy döt Net.

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the same terms as Perl itself.

See http://www.perl.com/perl/misc/Artistic.html

=cut
